# What is `dms-viz`?

Hi there 👋, if you have mutation-based data you want to view on an interactive 3D protein structure, you're in the right place! **`dms-viz`** is a tool that helps you take quantitative data associated with mutations to a protein and analyze that data with intuitive visual summaries and an interactive 3D protein structure. Visualizations created with **`dms-viz`** are _flexible_, _customizable_, and _shareable_.

::: tip Ready to use the tool?
Skip to the [Getting Started](/introduction/getting-started/) guide to learn how to prepare your data.
:::

## Purpose

Many biological questions require a thorough understanding of how mutations to a protein impact its functions. High-throughput techniques such as deep-mutational scanning (DMS) have greatly expanded the number of mutation-function datasets. For instance, DMS has been used to determine how mutations to viral proteins affect antibody escape, receptor affinity, and essential functions such as viral genome transcription and replication.

The mutation-based data generated by these approaches is often best understood in the context of a protein’s 3D structure; for instance, to assess questions like how mutations that affect antibody escape relate to the physical antibody binding epitope on the protein. However, current approaches for visualizing mutation data in the context of a protein’s structure are often cumbersome and require multiple steps and software. To streamline the visualization of mutation-associated data in the context of a protein structure, we developed a web-based tool, **`dms-viz`**. With **`dms-viz`**, users can straightforwardly visualize mutation-based data such as those from DMS experiments in the context of a 3D protein model in an interactive format.

::: tip Interested in what the visualizations look like?
Check out these [examples](/visualizing-data/vignettes/) to see `dms-viz` in action.
:::

## Why use `dms-viz`?

- **Flexible Inputs**

  Our command-line tool, `configure-dms-viz`, helps streamline data formatting by facilitating the integration of data from different sources into a singular, universal `JSON` specification file. Moreover, `configure-dms-viz` helps you define custom filters and tooltips, and identify common errors.

- **Customizable Visualizations**

  We've designed **`dms-viz`** with customization in mind. You can tailor the appearance of the protein structure to fit your needs. Furthermore, you can extend the functionality of the tool with custom filters, tooltips, colors, and more.

- **Shareable URLs**

  If your data is hosted online (e.g. in a [GitHub](https://github.com/) repository), you can share your data with URLs that automatically load the visualization while keeping your settings. However, if you don't want to host your data online, you can still use **`dms-viz`** with locally stored `.json` files.

## Contributing to `dms-viz`

**`dms-viz`** has two components:

1. A command line interface (CLI) for formatting data that was written in `Python` using the [click](https://click.palletsprojects.com/en/8.1.x/) API.
2. A web-based visualization tool written in `Javascript` using primarily the libraries [D3.js](https://d3js.org/) for making the visualizations and [NGL.js](https://nglviewer.org/#page-top) for creating interactive molecular structures.

If you're interested in contributing, check out the [Contributing Guide](/project-info/contributing-guide/) for details.

## Citation

If you end up using **`dms-viz`** in your paper, please cite us!

```md
Citation pending...
```
